Left Munich at 8.35 P.M., on 1st May, arriving at Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6.46, but train was an hour late.
Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which I got of it from the train and the little I could walk through the streets.
I feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible.
The impression I had was that we were leaving the West and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish rule.
We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to Klausenburgh.
Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale.
I had for dinner, or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty.
Get recipe for Mina.
I asked the waiter, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was a national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians.
I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed, I don’t know how I should be able to get on without it.
Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the British Museum, and made search among the books and maps in the library regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of the country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a nobleman of that country.
I find that the district he named is in the extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states, Transylvania, Moldavia, and Bukovina, in the midst of the Carpathian mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe.
I was not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the Castle Dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that Bistritz, the post town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place.
I shall enter here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when I talk over my travels with Mina.
In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities. Saxons in the South, and mixed with them the Wallachs, who are the descendants of the Dacians; Magyars in the West, and Szekelys in the East and North.
I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns.
This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns settled in it.
I read that every known superstition in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it were the centre of some sort of imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very interesting.
I must ask the Count all about them.
I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had all sorts of queer dreams.
There was a dog howling all night under my window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty.
Towards morning I slept and was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been sleeping soundly then.
I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize flour which they said was "mamaliga," and eggplant stuffed with forcemeat, a very excellent dish, which they call "impletata."
Get recipe for this also.
I had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a little before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station at 7.30 I had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour before we began to move.
It seems to me that the further east you go the more unpunctual are the trains.
What ought they to be in China?
All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of beauty of every kind.
Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to be subject to great floods.
It takes a lot of water, and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear.
At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts of attire.
Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque.
The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very clumsy about the waist.
They had all full white sleeves of some kind or other, and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them.
The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cowboy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails.
They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches.
They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing.
On the stage they would be set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands.
They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion.
It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is a very interesting old place.
Being practically on the frontier—for the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina—it has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it.
Fifty years ago a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions.
At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease.
Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned.
Of course, I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country.
I was evidently expected, for when I got near the door, I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress—white undergarment with a long double apron, front and back, of colored fabric, fitting almost too tightly for modesty.
When I came closer, she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?"
"Yes," I said. "Jonathan Harker."
She smiled and gave a message to an elderly man in white shirt sleeves who had followed her to the door.
He left but immediately returned with a letter.
I found that my landlord had received a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me.
However, when I inquired about the details, he seemed somewhat reticent and pretended that he could not understand my German.
This could not be true because, up to that point, he had understood it perfectly.
At least, he had answered my questions exactly as if he did.
He and his wife, the old lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of way.
He mumbled that the money had been sent in a letter, and that was all he knew.
When I asked if he knew Count Dracula and could tell me anything about his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves.
Saying that they knew nothing at all, they simply refused to speak further.
It was so close to departure time that I had no opportunity to ask anyone else.
The whole situation was very mysterious and not at all comforting.
Just before I was about to leave, the old lady came up to my room and spoke in a very hysterical manner.
"Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?"
She was so agitated that she seemed to have lost her grasp of German and mixed it with another language that I did not recognize.
I was barely able to follow her by asking many questions.
When I told her that I had to leave immediately and that I was engaged in important business, she asked again.
"Do you know what day it is?"
I answered that it was the fourth of May.
She shook her head and repeated.
"Oh, yes! I know that! I know that! But do you know what day it is?"
When I told her that I did not understand, she continued.
"It is the eve of St. George’s Day.
Do you not know that tonight, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have full sway?
Do you know where you are going and what you are walking into?"
She was so visibly distressed that I tried to comfort her, but to no avail.
Finally, she fell to her knees and begged me not to go—at least to wait a day or two before leaving.
The whole situation was absurd, yet I could not shake a sense of unease.
However, I had business to attend to, and I could not allow anything to interfere with it.
I attempted to help her up and said, as gravely as I could, that I appreciated her concern, but my duty was imperative, and I must go.
She then rose, dried her eyes, and took a crucifix from her neck, offering it to me.
I did not know what to do.
As an English Churchman, I had been taught to regard such things as somewhat idolatrous.
Yet, it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady who meant well and was in such a state of distress.
She must have seen the doubt in my expression, for she placed the rosary around my neck and said, "For your mother’s sake," before leaving the room.
I am writing this entry in my diary while waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late.
The crucifix is still around my neck.
Whether it is the old lady’s fear, the many ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not know, but I do not feel nearly as at ease as usual.
If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my goodbye.
Here comes the coach!
The gray of the morning has passed, and the sun is now high over the distant horizon, jagged with trees or hills—I know not which, for they are so far away that big things and small blur together.
I am not sleepy, and since I am not to be awakened until I choose, I write until sleep takes me.
There are many odd things to record.
Lest whoever reads this might suspect that I dined too well before I left Bistritz, let me recount my meal exactly.
I dined on what they called "robber steak"—bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, strung on sticks, and roasted over the fire in a style reminiscent of London’s cat meat vendors.
The wine was Golden Mediasch, which left a peculiar sting on the tongue, though not an unpleasant one.
I had only two glasses of this and nothing else.
When I boarded the coach, the driver had not yet taken his seat, and I saw him speaking with the landlady.
They were clearly talking about me, for every now and then, they glanced in my direction.
Some of the people sitting on the bench outside—the "word-bearer" bench, as they call it—came closer to listen and then looked at me, most of them with pity in their eyes.
I heard many strange words repeated often.
Since the crowd consisted of many nationalities, I quietly retrieved my polyglot dictionary from my bag and looked them up.
I must admit, the results were not reassuring.
As we departed, the crowd at the inn door—now grown to a considerable size—all made the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers toward me.
With some difficulty, I got a fellow passenger to explain the gesture.
At first, he refused to answer, but when he learned that I was English, he explained that it was a charm or protection against the evil eye.
This was not the most comforting information for someone about to journey into the unknown to meet a mysterious stranger.
However, everyone seemed so kind-hearted, so sorrowful, and so sympathetic that I could not help but be touched.
I will never forget the last glimpse I had of the inn yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves as they stood beneath the wide archway.
Behind them, the rich foliage of oleander and orange trees clustered in green tubs at the center of the yard.
Then, our driver—his wide linen trousers, or "gotza," covering the entire front of the box seat—cracked his massive whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast.
With that, we set off on our journey.
I soon forgot my ghostly fears in the beauty of the landscape.
Had I understood the languages spoken by my fellow passengers, however, I might not have been able to dismiss my anxieties so easily.
Before us lay rolling green hills, full of forests and groves, with steep slopes crowned by clusters of trees or farmhouses, their blank gable ends facing the road.
Everywhere, fruit blossoms abounded—apple, plum, pear, and cherry.
As we passed, I saw fallen petals scattered across the green grass beneath the trees.
As the road wound through the "Mittel Land," a fellow traveler touched my arm.
As we wound on our endless way and the sun sank lower and lower behind us, the shadows of the evening began to creep around us.
This was emphasized by the fact that the snowy mountaintop still held the sunset and seemed to glow with a delicate, cool pink.
Here and there, we passed Czechs and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that goiter was painfully prevalent.
By the roadside, there were many crosses, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves.
Here and there, a peasant man or woman knelt before a shrine, not even turning around as we approached, seemingly lost in the self-surrender of devotion, oblivious to the outer world.
There were many things new to me. for instance, hayricks in the trees and, here and there, beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems shining like silver through the delicate green leaves.
Now and again, we passed a leiter-wagon—the ordinary peasant’s cart—with its long, snake-like vertebra, designed to handle the rough road.
On this, there was always a group of homecoming peasants. the Czechs in white sheepskins and the Slovaks in colored ones, the latter carrying their long staves, with axes at the ends, like lances.
As the evening fell, it grew very cold, and the deepening twilight merged the gloom of the oak, beech, and pine trees into one dark mist.
In the valleys, which ran deep between the spurs of the hills as we ascended through the Pass, dark firs stood out against the background of lingering snow.
Sometimes, as the road cut through the pine woods, the looming darkness made it seem as though the trees were closing in on us.
Great masses of grey mist clung to the trees, producing a peculiarly eerie and solemn effect, heightening the grim thoughts and strange fancies kindled earlier in the evening.
The sunset had cast ghostly shadows among the clouds, which, in the Carpathians, seem to wind ceaselessly through the valleys.
At times, the hills were so steep that, despite the driver’s haste, the horses could only move slowly.
I wanted to get down and walk, as we do at home, but the driver would not allow it.
"No, no," he said, "you must not walk here; the dogs are too fierce."
Then he added, with what he must have thought was grim humor—glancing at the other passengers for approval—"And you may have enough of such matters before you go to sleep."
The only stop he allowed was a brief pause to light the lamps.
When night fell, there was a noticeable excitement among the passengers.
They kept speaking to the driver, urging him to go faster.
He lashed the horses mercilessly with his long whip and, with wild cries of encouragement, drove them on.
Through the darkness, I saw a patch of grey light ahead, as though there was a gap in the hills.
The passengers' excitement increased.
The rickety coach rocked violently on its great leather springs, swaying like a boat in a storm.
I had to hold on tightly.
The road leveled out, and we seemed to fly forward.
The mountains drew closer on either side, frowning down upon us.
We were entering the Borgo Pass.
One by one, several passengers offered me gifts, pressing them into my hands with earnest insistence, allowing no refusal.
The gifts were strange and varied, but each was given in good faith, with a kind word, a blessing, and a mix of fear-driven gestures—the sign of the cross and the warding off of the evil eye.
As we sped forward, the driver leaned in, while the passengers craned over the edge of the coach, peering eagerly into the darkness.
It was clear that something significant was either happening or expected.
But when I asked, no one would explain.
The tension continued for some time.
At last, we saw the Pass opening on the eastern side.
Dark, rolling clouds loomed overhead, and the air felt heavy with the oppressive presence of an impending storm.
It seemed as if the mountain range had divided two different atmospheres, and now we had entered the stormy one.
I was scanning the darkness for the carriage that was supposed to take me to the Count.
I expected at any moment to see the glow of lamps.
But all was dark.
The only light came from our own flickering lamps, in which the steam from our hard-driven horses rose in ghostly clouds.
The sandy road ahead was visible in the lamplight, but there was no sign of another vehicle.
The passengers sighed with relief, mocking my own disappointment.
I was considering what to do next when the driver checked his watch and murmured something to the others.
I barely caught the words—they were spoken in a hushed tone—but I thought he said, "An hour less than the time."
Then he turned to me and said in clumsy German.
"There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected after all. He will now go on to Bukovina and return tomorrow or the next day—better the next day."
As he spoke, the horses began to neigh, snort, and plunge wildly.
The driver struggled to hold them.
Then, amidst screams from the peasants and frantic crossing of themselves, a calèche with four black horses appeared behind us, overtook us, and stopped beside our coach.
The flash of our lamps revealed the horses—splendid, coal-black beasts.
They were driven by a tall man with a long brown beard and a great black hat that obscured his face.
Only his eyes were visible, gleaming red in the lamplight.
He addressed our driver.
"You are early tonight, my friend."
The man stammered, "The English Herr was in a hurry."
The stranger smiled.
"That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend. I know too much, and my horses are swift."
As he spoke, the lamplight revealed a mouth with sharp white teeth and lips unnaturally red.
One of my companions whispered a line from Bürger’s "Lenore."
The strange driver must have heard, for he smiled menacingly.
The passenger turned away and crossed himself.
"Give me the Herr’s luggage," the driver ordered.
With surprising speed, my bags were transferred to the calèche.
I climbed down from the coach, and as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helped me down.
His grip on my arm was like steel—his strength must have been immense.
Without a word, he snapped the reins, and the horses sprang forward.
We plunged into the darkness of the Pass.
Looking back, I saw the steam rising from the coach horses, lit by the lamps, and silhouetted against it were my former companions crossing themselves.
Then the driver cracked his whip, and they vanished into the night on their way to Bukovina.
A strange chill settled over me, and I felt suddenly alone.
But a cloak was thrown over my shoulders and a rug placed over my knees.
"The night is chill, mein Herr," the driver said in perfect German.
"My master, the Count, bade me take all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz—the plum brandy of the country—underneath the seat if you should require it."
I did not take any, but knowing it was there was oddly reassuring.
I felt strange and not a little afraid.
Had there been an alternative, I would have taken it rather than continue this unknown journey.
The carriage moved at a breakneck pace.
Then, we made a sharp turn and seemed to be traveling over the same ground again.
I marked a landmark and confirmed my suspicion.
I wanted to ask the driver why, but I feared any protest would be useless.
Curious about the time, I struck a match and checked my watch.
It was just before midnight.
A shiver ran through me.
Then, in the distance, a dog howled—a long, agonized wail.
One by one, other dogs joined in, their cries carried by the wind.
Then, from the mountains, came a sharper, more chilling sound—the howls of wolves.
The horses reared and trembled.
The driver calmed them.
At the far end of the Pass, he suddenly turned sharply down a narrow road to the right.

Soon, we were hemmed in by trees, which in places arched right over the roadway until we passed as though through a tunnel.
Again, great frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side.
Though we were in shelter, we could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept along.
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around us were covered with a white blanket.
The keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs, though this grew fainter as we went on our way.
The baying of the wolves sounded nearer and nearer, as though they were closing in on us from every side.
I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear.
The driver, however, was not in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to the left and right, but I could not see anything through the darkness.
Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame.
The driver saw it at the same moment.
He at once checked the horses and, jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness.
I did not know what to do, the less so as the howling of the wolves grew closer.
While I wondered, the driver suddenly appeared again and, without a word, took his seat, and we resumed our journey.
I think I must have fallen asleep and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now, looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
Once, the flame appeared so near the road that even in the darkness around us, I could watch the driver’s motions.
He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose—it must have been very faint, for it did not seem to illuminate the place around it at all—and, gathering a few stones, formed them into some device.
Once, there appeared a strange optical effect. when he stood between me and the flame, he did not obstruct it, for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same.
This startled me, but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes had deceived me, straining through the darkness.
Then, for a time, there were no blue flames, and we sped onward through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.
At last, there came a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to tremble worse than ever and to snort and scream with fright.
I could not see any cause for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether.
Just then, the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light, I saw around us a ring of wolves.
They had white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair.
They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence that held them than even when they howled.
For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear.
It is only when a man feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can understand their true import.
All at once, the wolves began to howl, as though the moonlight had had some peculiar effect on them.
The horses jumped about and reared, looking helplessly around with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see.
But the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side, and they had perforce to remain within it.
I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the ring and to aid his approach.
I shouted and beat the side of the calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side so as to give him a chance of reaching the trap.
How he came there, I know not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command.
Looking towards the sound, I saw him standing in the roadway.
As he swept his long arms as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the wolves fell back and back, further still.
Just then, a heavy cloud passed across the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness.
When I could see again, the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the wolves had disappeared.
This was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move.
The time seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost complete darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon.
We kept on ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main, always ascending.
Suddenly, I became conscious of the fact that the driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a vast, ruined castle.
From its tall black windows came no ray of light, and its broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky.
I must have been asleep, for certainly, if I had been fully awake, I must have noticed the approach of such a remarkable place.
In the gloom, the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really was.
I have not yet been able to see it by daylight.
When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand to assist me in alighting.
Again, I could not but notice his prodigious strength.
His hand actually seemed like a steel vise that could have crushed mine if he had chosen.
Then, he took out my traps and placed them on the ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone.
Even in the dim light, I could see that the stone was massively carved, though the carving had been much worn by time and weather.
As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the reins.
The horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared down one of the dark openings.
I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do.
Of a bell or knocker, there was no sign.
Through these frowning walls and dark window openings, it was not likely that my voice could penetrate.
The time I waited seemed endless, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon me.
What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked?
Was this a customary incident in the life of a solicitor’s clerk sent out to explain the purchase of a London estate to a foreigner?
Solicitor’s clerk!
Mina would not like that.
Solicitor—for just before leaving London, I got word that my examination was successful, and I am now a full-blown solicitor!
I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see if I were awake.
It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and I expected that I should suddenly awake and find myself at home, with the dawn struggling in through the windows, as I had now and again felt in the morning after a day of overwork.
But my flesh answered the pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived.
I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians.
All I could do now was to be patient and wait for the coming of the morning.
Just as I had come to this conclusion, I heard a heavy step approaching behind the great door and saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming light.
Then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of massive bolts being drawn back.
A key was turned with the loud grating noise of long disuse, and the great door swung back.
Within stood a tall old man, clean-shaven save for a long white mustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck of color about him anywhere.
He held in his hand an antique silver lamp, in which the flame burned without a chimney or globe of any kind, throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draft of the open door.
The old man motioned me in with his right hand with a courtly gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange intonation.
"Welcome to my house! Enter freely and of your own will!"
He made no motion of stepping to meet me but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone.
The instant, however, that I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and, holding out his hand, grasped mine with a strength that made me wince—an effect that was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as ice, more like the hand of a dead man than a living one.
"Welcome to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of the happiness you bring!"
The strength of the handshake was so much akin to that which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that for a moment, I doubted if it were not the same person to whom I was speaking.
So, to make sure, I said interrogatively.
"Count Dracula?"
He bowed in a courtly way as he replied.
"I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house.
Come in; the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest."
As he was speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and, stepping out, took my luggage.
He had carried it in before I could forestall him.
I protested, but he insisted.
"Nay, sir, you are my guest.
It is late, and my people are not available.
Let me see to your comfort myself."
He insisted on carrying my traps along the passage and then up a great winding stair and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily.
At the end of this, he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared.
The Count halted, put down my bags, closed the door, and, crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp and seemingly without a window of any sort.
Passing through this, he opened another door and motioned me to enter.
It was a welcome sight, for here was a great bedroom, well-lit and warmed with another log fire, also recently added to, for the top logs were fresh, sending a hollow roar up the wide chimney.
The Count himself left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying before he closed the door.
"You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your toilet.
I trust you will find all you wish.
When you are ready, come into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared."
The light and warmth, along with the Count’s courteous welcome, seemed to have dissipated all my doubts and fears.
Having then reached my normal state, I discovered that I was half-famished with hunger.
So, making a hasty toilet, I went into the other room.
I found supper already laid out.
My host, who stood on one side of the great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of his hand toward the table and said.
"I pray you, be seated and sup how you please.
You will, I trust, excuse me that I do not join you, but I have dined already, and I do not sup."
I handed him the sealed letter that Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me.
He opened it and read it gravely.
Then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me to read.
One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of pleasure.
"I must regret that an attack of gout, from which malady I am a constant sufferer, forbids absolutely any traveling on my part for some time to come.
But I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence.
He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own way, and of a very faithful disposition.
He is discreet and silent and has grown into manhood in my service.
He shall be ready to attend on you when you will during his stay and shall take your instructions in all matters."
The Count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and I fell at once upon an excellent roast chicken.
This, with some cheese, a salad, and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I had two glasses, was my supper.
During the time I was eating, the Count asked me many questions about my journey, and I told him, bit by bit, all I had experienced.
By this time, I had finished my supper, and at my host’s request, I had drawn up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar that he offered me, at the same time excusing himself, saying that he did not smoke.
I now had an opportunity to observe him and found that he had very marked physiognomy.
His face was strong—a very strong—aquiline, with a high bridge on the thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils.
His forehead was lofty and domed, with hair growing scantily around the temples but profusely elsewhere.
His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion.
The mouth, so far as I could see it under the heavy mustache, was fixed and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth.
These protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a man of his years.
For the rest, his ears were pale and, at the tops, extremely pointed.
The chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks were firm though thin.
The general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.
Until now, I had only noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine.
But seeing them now close to me, I could not help but notice that they were rather coarse—broad, with squat fingers.
Strange to say, there were hairs in the center of his palm.
The nails were long and fine and cut to a sharp point.
As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me, I could not repress a shudder.
It may have been that his breath was rank, but a horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, no matter how I tried, I could not conceal.
The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back.
With a grim sort of smile, which showed more of his protuberant teeth than he had yet revealed, he sat himself down again on his own side of the fireplace.
We were both silent for a while, and as I looked toward the window, I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn.
There seemed to be a strange stillness over everything.
But as I listened, I heard, as if from down below in the valley, the howling of many wolves.